Hey friends, I want to
thank our sponsor ray gun.
Are you struggling to replicate
the bugs and performance issues
that your customers are reporting
plug ray gun into your
web and mobile applications right
now and diagnose problems in
minutes rather than hours kiss.
Goodbye having to dig through
log files and relying on
frustrated users to report issues
make your software development life
so much easier using ray
guns error crash and performance
monitoring tools. Every software team
can create Flawless software experiences
for their customers with Reagan.
Try it free today and
raygun.com. That's are a y
gu n.com. Honey, this is
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes today.
I'm talking with Matthew conlon.
He's a PhD student interested
in how computers can help
people communicate complex information more
effectively and the editor-in-chief of
parametric press how are you
sir? I'm great Scott. Thanks
so much for having me.
It is absolutely my pleasure.
I've been trying to get
you on the show for
a while because I I
stumbled upon you on the
internet, you know every Today
we see interesting stuff and
there's lots of interesting people
but every once in a
while you find it interesting
person that you then you
kind of start following around
like I was seeing. Oh,
wow, he worked on this
and then he worked on
that and oh that's interesting.
I get to know who
this this Matthew Conlan is
and the first time I
heard of the work that
you were working on was
at this this parametric, press
its parametric dot, press kudos
for the top level domain
there. Thank you unraveling the
Article that kind of went
low-key viral, I think it
was on Hacker News for
a while, but it was
just everywhere. Everyone was talking
about this article that Omar
shahada did called unraveling the
jpeg hosted on your on
your site. What is it
that the capture the imagination
of the internet with this
article? Yeah. So this article
walks readers through the technology
that makes jpegs possible on
the internet. So I think
one thing with the article
is that you know, it's
covering a topic that everyone
who uses computers or the
internet is familiar with which
is jpeg images and how
they can let us send
pictures to one another but
the way that Omar presented
the information was kind of
really special and really interesting.
So rather than just talking
about the technology and showing
kind of static diagrams and
equations. He built these interactive
diagrams that would allow readers
to actually manipulate the bits
that make up the image
and see how changing different
pieces of information actually affect
how the image is encoded
and how it appears on
the screen. So that's something
that You know, the internet
is a great medium to
be able to create interactive
things like this and it
doesn't happen. So often that
you get someone who's so
knowledgeable and passionate as Omar
who's able to create something
like that and share it
with so many people indeed
when I first arrived at
this page as we all
have a half-dozen long-form articles
that we're we promised ourselves
that will read that the
come at us all year
all year long every day.
I thought oh, this is
like a medium a medium
post and by medium, I
mean nice typography. Clean use
of white space but it's
got dramatic use of typography
including some verticals and some
interesting fonts and it immediately
presents itself. And you go
in a second. This is
not what you typically see
in the internet and things
that I thought were images
were not and good use
of CSS and I started
to wonder what's going on
here and then you start
scrolling down and there's a
picture of a cat which
we've seen before and then
there's some some bits and
you're encouraged to manipulate the
bits. And then the the
jpeg is encoded and decoded
like live. I thought I
was going to like hurt
my machine or corrupted or
something. Like I was going
to like changing one bite
in a JPEG was going
to ruin things but it
didn't really ruin it. Yeah,
so that's a challenge with
something like this is how
do you make it so
that the interactions are accessible
for people in the so
that they're not, you know
scared to mess anything up
and we tried really hard
to think about different ways
of how to do that.
But, you know providing kind
of Good error messages and
feedback. If you do corrupt
the image quote-unquote corrupt and
there's a very clear reset
button that can always take
you right back to the
start. But we also added
links in line with the
text. So if you click
on particular sections of the
text Omar suggest these particular
configurations of the bits that
you can just click on
and it will set itself
in that configuration. You can
kind of learn okay. Here's
you know, just changing this
one number. Here's what happens
and you get this interesting
output now, maybe I'll try
something - Often see what
do these other configurations do
there was so much about
this article in this level
of interactivity that worked and
I think that that point
that you just made that
it's one thing to have
some pros and then have
a bitter a bit of
interactivity and then have some
pros but he literally in
the middle of a sentence
says, you know, it's interesting
that changing. Some numbers doesn't
impact the image while link
setting at this number 217
online one ruins the image
and then you click on
it and then it does
exactly See what it says
it was going to do
you build interactivity between the
pros and the the island
of of interactivity. Exactly. And
that's something that I think
can be really powerful is
tying text to the actual
graphics on the page and
it's something unfortunately. We don't
see too often because you
think about how would you
do that in a site
built on WordPress or medium?
For example, it just may
not be possible. Unless you're
really diving into the low-level
under underlying HTML and JavaScript
which brings me to a
really interesting question not to
like You know impugn the
entire internet here because we
all appreciate I don't necessarily
appreciate medium, but I appreciate
the idea of free and
easy publishing and I appreciate
that WordPress has become the
operating system that the internet
seems to run on. But
you know, I grew up
on you know, Gio cities
and live journal and things
like that where we were
hacking in my space by
just editing the HTML now
we want to be able
to just slap the keyboard
and make things work. These
web sites like WordPress and
medium have really kept Us
from making articles like what
you have a parametric press
it's prevented us from creating
this level of interactivity. Absolutely.
I mean, I think you
take the good with the
bad because you know WordPress
and other blogging platforms really
they do give people a
voice to publish to a
large audience that they wouldn't
have otherwise, but kind of
the their these golden handcuffs
in a way as well
because right you're not getting
able to manipulate the underlying
code or add the custom
design that you want to
so we think of parametric
Press is kind of pushing
back against that and so
the whole issue of the
parametric press is open source.
So we're kind of trying
to provide not only a
really great publication but also
kind of a model for
other people to follow as
well. Why do you think
that 10 20 years ago?
We were promised an interactive
internet and by that, I
mean not just books copied
in there static Pros to
the internet, but I seem
to remember in the early
days with things like Java.
Let's we were promised an
interactive internet and they just
all stopped one day. I
think it goes back even
even further than that. So
one of my big Inspirations
for this project is Alan
Kay and his dynabook, but
I don't know. I mean
they're I don't think there's
any easy answer for one.
I think that publishing interactive
content like this is is
really hard. I mean it
took a team of people
with sort of different backgrounds
like designers writers as programmers
editors all coming together to
be able to make this
happen. And but also if
you think about just the
the funding model of the
internet and how publishing works.
It's not always in Publishers
best interest to spend so
much time creating the content
like this. And if you
have a new medium like
the internet where people don't
really know what the possibilities
are. Maybe the audience isn't
asking for quite as much
because they don't even know
that it's possible then idea
that people don't know what's
possible is interesting. Because it's
been so long since the
internet was like this. It's
been many many years where
it became a largely static
thing and I do realize
that I'm making some broad
generalizations here that there's a
whole generation of people who
are surprised when someone utilizes,
you know, scrolling in an
unusual way to do an
infinite scroll or horizontal scroll
or when the New York
Times or 538 does a
visualization and someone goes oh
my goodness. How did that
pop out of that do
that? So it's become the
The exception rather than the
rule right? I mean so
I grew up in the
generation. So my first social
network that I was on
was my space and I
really love that just to
be able to customize the
design of my page for
example, and then I remember
moving to Facebook and you
can do any of that
which which felt really frustrating
even though the design was
clean and all my friends
were on it. Right but
I kind of have always
felt like there were these
two internet's existing at the
same time. Like there was
the internet of the big
Usher's so there's the New
York Times and CNN websites
and things like this, but
then there's also this other
internet where people are just
having fun and making their
own web pages and making
their own content. And so
I've always kind of identified
with that that second group
but I don't think that
it has to remain so
small and uh, I think
that as publishing tools become
more powerful. Hopefully we can
bring some of these ideas
to more of the mainstream.
Sometimes people point to Star
Trek. As the time when
we thought that interactive graphics
and interactive movement and things
like quote-unquote iPad would be
would would be we're conceived
of but you point to
Alan Kay who developed the
dynabook in the late 60s
early 70s when he was
doing his Ph.D. As being
your inspiration. Did you think
about the Star Trek or
iPads and things like that?
And while you were doing
this work, so I didn't
think about Star Trek one
thing that I did think
about was the The Illustrated
primer, I know that from
I think it's Neal Stephenson's
book that I forget the
exact title. It's the ladies
the ladies guide the young
lady's Illustrated primer guide where
she's given this book which
is kind of this interactive
tutoring system and the book
is kind of an artificial
intelligence and it learns with
you and it can modify
what it's telling you based
on how you doing and
based on what your interests
are. And so that was
something that was really eye-opening
to me when I first
That because it was I
think that book was written
in the early 90s and
it's something that's like, oh,
yeah, we should definitely have
this. Why don't we and
why isn't there anybody that
I can that I can
find who's even like working
on this or talking about
this? Hmm. Yeah, that book
is the diamond age young
ladies Illustrated primer by Neal
Stephenson part of a his
kind of post cyberpunk style
of writing it do these
all of these things whether
it be dynabook or the
Apple Newton or I think
about hypercard Guard we're all
a promise of the easy
interactivity and the and then
the during the rise of
JavaScript in the last few
years as well as early
days with Java applets. It
seemed like the barrier to
entry to create an interactive
visualization kind of got higher
and higher to like only
programmers could do such a
thing not not Publishers or
not people who want to
just simply present information and
interactive way. Yeah. I think
that's true. And I think
we're seeing that some with
web development. In general like
if you look at discussions
that are happening for example
in the react Community right
now with like, you know,
there's these really really powerful
tools and build systems, like
react that allow you to
make web applications that are
you know, well engineered and
well-structured but the cost that
you have for that is
that a beginner coming into
these things so just can't
wrap their head around why
they're all necessary, right? And
even if you you know
that at the end of
the day, it's just HTML
and JavaScript. So why do
we need all of these
other things? Things I think
there's maybe something similar in
the area of data visualization.
I mean, I think that
D3 has and Mike Bostock
have really done a great
job in terms of making
that accessible to more people.
I mean, it's just the
sheer number of examples and
open source code that he's
posted on the internet I
think has been a huge
inspiration and been to that
Community for sure. Yeah. Definitely.
I was going to bring
up Mike Bostock his kind
of seminal article on up.
Our way to code bringing
the idea of like a
jupyter notebook to integrated discovery
of data. He has a
great quote in there called
a / Ben shneiderman that
says the purpose of visualization
is in sight not pictures
and interactivity as a dimension
to pictures that allows you
to get that Insight. I
think I think that's right.
It's this whole other dimension
that maybe we haven't thought
about before when we're focused
more on kind of just
the graphic design of visualizations
and thinking about how oh,
they're laid out on the
page as a designer when
you realize that there's this
whole other tool that you
have which is motion and
responsiveness. There are tons of
interesting capabilities that open up
Sick of waiting for your
CI test to pass or
having to manage different CI
servers for different teams using
build kite. You can run
fast and reliable CI pipelines
for every type of project
whether it's back end tests
mobile apps or even custom
Hardware build kites agent helps
you scale to thousands of
parallel jobs and your secrets
and source code never leave
your infrastructure. There's great documentation
a clean web UI and
plug-ins for different types of
tools visit build kite. That's
ee.com Hanselman for a 14-day
free trial and see how
shopify's scaled from 300 to
1500 Engineers while keeping their
build times under five minutes.
Let's build kite.com Hanselman. How
did this work? You have
you are the Editor in
Chief of parametric, press do
you go looking for someone
like Omar and then you
work together cooperatively or do
you did he come to
you? How do you how
did that happen? Yeah, so
parametric press Started just as
an idea that I had
and I kind of recruited
a few friends of mine
to work on it. So
another editor that was on
board for this issue is
Fred Homan who's a PhD
student at Georgia Tech and
our collaborators terrorist Allah who
is one of the editors
in terms of the text.
We wrote out a call
for proposals and we sort
of built up this idea
by just like writing out.
Okay, here's what we want
the thing to look like
and we sent it to
all of our friends and
they gave us feedback and
we kind of refine it
and refine it until we
had something that like really
captured the idea. We were
trying to get at at
that point. We sent it
to Andrew old one who's
the CTO of O'Reilly and
he gave us a little
bit of money to create
the first issue. So thanks
a lot Andrew for making
that happen at O'Reilly media
and once we had that
Should we put out this
call for proposals online? We
said hey, if you're an
author who's interested in this
kind of new way of
Storytelling that utilizes visualization and
interactive Graphics send in your
proposal just an idea a
short paragraph and we have
some funds to pay you
and we have some people
on board who are experts
at the visualization side of
things who can help out
on the programming side of
things. So we wanted to
make sure that people who
hadn't necessarily worked on this
style of content before wouldn't
be scared off by trying
to take it on and
that was successful and we
got I think about 35
submissions for ultimately five spots.
And so it was very
competitive for the first round.
I think it sounds like
it couldn't have gone better
to you. Hit it out
of the park on the
first try there. Well, thank
you. Now I was looking
at this and the first
thing I did of course
is a programmers. I wouldn't
view Source I start to
figure out like oh, this
is Using how did how
did this happen? I want
to understand was this an
app like was each page
was each article and app
but it appears that it's
more than that. This is
some kind of a document
is part of a larger
larger way of thinking about
how to visualize things as
part of a toolkit. That's
right. So the whole issue
is built on this open
source project called idle, which
is an interactive publishing system
that I've been working on
for the past couple of
years as part of my
PhD research at the University
of Washington. Washington's and one
of the so what we
wanted to do is, you
know test out this system
in a real a real
world setting so we wanted
to say okay we're going
to do this live. We're
going to make the best
possible article issue that we
can and we're also going
to use that to understand
what are the failure points
of the system what needs
Improvement and so on so
that we can sort of
in typical open source fashion
continue improving Everything in the
open and so this was
one thing about the parametric
press was that it was
the first kind of multi
page magazine that was built
on the tool. So previously
we had seen people creating,
you know, single page what
you would call explorable explanations
or interactive essays using it,
but never anything that kind
of had its own style
and design and it was
very cohesive across multiple Pages.
I'm looking up at idle
and I'm going to make
sure that I include Links
to all of this in
the show notes, of course,
it spilled ID yll and
in the gallery, there is
an example that I think
is particularly interesting when it
shows you the difference between
where's the pros? Where's the
visualization? And where's the componentry?
Because it really showcases the
idea that this isn't meant
for one person necessarily but
perhaps a way to reduce
the amount of code required
for collaboration between the researcher
or a journalist in a
programmer and the example I'm
thinking of is this card
shuffling example, which is basically
Explaining, you know when you
shuffle a card, how does
it really behave is there
what we think is intuitive
is not necessarily how it
works. If you go look
at the code on GitHub,
there is some there's some
react you can use D3
so like you can get
to the low level but
if you look at the
pros within the pros written
in this Idol markup language,
it looks kind of more
like mark down with some
meaning than it does code.
I don't even see any
any JavaScript you kept a
nice separation. Of responsibilities. Thank
you. Yeah, that's I'm glad
you pointed that out because
that was actually one of
the big motivations for this
project was thinking about you
know, how do you enable
collaboration between people with different
skills, whether they're writers are
technical people who are more
on the programming side or
designers who are interested in
making things look good and
feel nice. And so this
understanding that there needs to
be both a separation of
concerns, but the ability for
people to Collaborate kind of
came out of a lot
of the work that I
did when I was at
5:38. I was on the
graphics desk there and so
I understood kind of how
a newsroom Works in that
sense that there are people
who have these really specialized
skills and they have to
all work together and when
you're publishing it interactive content,
a lot of the tools
don't acknowledge that there's there's
tools that really help out
one party or the other
but then when you actually
Actually have to put the
two together. It's a real
struggle. And so you'll have
for example maybe a an
HTML page with something that
a writer wrote put in
has a has a typo
in it. Then how does
an editor go and fix
that do they go on
get Hub and like change
this one thing do they
have do they have to
understand get just in order
to add a comma to
to the article that seems
like something that is shouldn't
be necessary. Right? And so
with idle the idea is
that there's this Mark Up
which contains all of the
text and there's the code
which has the kind of
Snippets of D3 or react
or whatever and those are
separate but they're tied together
through these I guess you
would call them includes or
component markup lives in the
idol file. So you can
kind of orchestrate where things
appear and how they look
and what happens when someone
reaches a certain section on
the page or when someone
clicks on something that's all
done in the mark-up, but
the actual implementation details of
the graphics themselves or Separate.
Yeah, one of the things
that was particularly clever about
Fred holmen's cards shuffling example
was that there certainly like
a bunch of pros and
then there's an interactive thing
with cards running around on
the page, but in the
middle of sentences in line
referring to the cards and
Suits it'll say something like
once the King of Diamonds
moves up one position. He's
chosen rather than to spell
out King of Diamonds. He
literally has a red k
and a diamond Cleanly as
if it's as if it
were a glyph that the
browser itself knew about and
I thought to myself I'll
hang on a second. There's
no there's no King of
Diamonds glyph that is like
a Unicode thing. How did
he do that? There's a
component within the code. That's
a react component that literally
exists to visualize a card.
It's only like 16 lines.
If you pull out white
space and curly braces and
it takes care of saying
that so the the author
just says just like they
would with An equation with
like mathml they say I
want a visualization that represents
an inline card and suit,
it's extremely clean and very
very clever. Thanks. Yeah, I
think there's something to be
said to be able to
kind of write things declaratively
like this where you know,
you can really just say
I want this card representation
here. I'm not going to
worry about you know, how
the component is implemented and
that's something separate. But yeah,
so I think Fred did
a great job utilizing the
the toolkit there and making
it A nice article out
of it. So is this
something that like a New
York Times or 538 or
one of the big visualisations
shops that everyone is impressed
with would do or they
doing a lot of there
things with D3 dot J's,
manually. Yeah. So most of
the big media Outlets today
have invested a lot in
infrastructure that you know, it
doesn't look exactly like Idol
but has a lot of
the same ideas behind it,
which is kind of combining
text and Pros. And code
in this way. So I
wouldn't expect that. They would
necessarily adopt this project in
the short term. I think
that where I would expect
it to have a bigger
impact is at smaller media
Outlets that actually don't have
the technical capacity to build
this kind of thing on
their own so I don't
they can say okay, here's
you know, here's this project
that allows us to publish
interactive articles in a well
structured way that has a
lot of these design decisions.
Are you taking care of
for us? So this could
be Integrated into someone else's
existing publishing pipeline as well.
If they did use WordPress.
I presume that there would
be a way that they
could integrate this in without
having to have the entire
sites publishing workflow move to
idle. That's right. Yeah, so
it's designed so that you
can either kind of use
it wholesale like use it
to publish everything and kind
of turn it into a
CMS or do it in
a sort of a more
piece male way where either
you can embed idle Snippets
In Articles or just create
single Idol. Articles and embed
those in your in your
WordPress deployment or something. Hmm
many years ago and a
little bit still now. I
was a big fan of
Edward tufte and everything that
he had written and I
think a lot of us
went to see tufty live
and receive his books on,
you know, his books on
the visual display of quantitative
information. A lot of those
bits of ways does present
information is very static though.
I think know that his
things were taught in school
for print in newspapers and
things But where is the
research and the work happening
right now for doing these
kind of things interactively? Yeah,
so I think tufte is
great. I mean I've learned
a ton from from his
writing and it from his
books, but you're absolutely right
that he's focused on print
design more than interaction. Right?
And so there are a
few threads of research I
think happening in this area
now if you look at
the From the academic Community.
The IEEE Vis conference often
has very rigorous academic research
that that looks at. How
do you incorporate interaction into
data-driven storytelling in this way
and going even even further
back? I think that interactivity
has been incorporated into data
analytics systems for a while
now looking at for example,
the work of Ben shneiderman
who I think you mentioned
briefly before but it's just
more. Recently that we're thinking
about the combination of data
and visualization and interactivity and
this more kind of Storytelling
capacity. Hmm. When I tried
to show some of the
things that are attractive parametric
press to my wife who
is highly educated and has
more degrees than I do
but is not a techie.
She wasn't sure what was
going to be interactive and
wasn't what wasn't and I
tried to figure out why
that was what was it
about? The web that has
taught her that most things
on the web are flat
and static. You know, she
I found it like for
example looking at your article
on particle physics where you
do things like how to
accelerate a particle using an
electric field and it's full
of these interactive interfaces. Those
were not immediately intuitive to
me and they are all
new in independent in a
little interaction moments little applications
of they would have been
Java applets 20 years. Go
how do you teach that
to someone who's not intuitively
a techie to do that
to try to interact with
that and feel comfortable with
that, right? Yeah. I think
it's really interesting how we
come to understand a medium
like the internet. So if
you for example came across
this diagram in the context
of a video game, for
example, you would automatically assume
that everything was interactive. Probably
right exactly. We've been conditioned
to think that posts on
the internet are typically static
and so there are You
know, there are a few
ways that we can sort
of try to help through
different design cues inform people
that there are these interactions
that you can take. For
example, one thing that we
did which may or may
not have been successful in
the first article in Omar's
peace was to include an
animated gif of someone interacting
with the widget before they
actually got to it. So
there's this this animation that
includes a mouse pointer that
shows them highlighting text and
manipulating it so that you
had a little cue that
okay later. In the article,
you're going to get to
be a be able to
do that yourself. I think
that something that Nikki case
said which we can probably
learn from is to make
everything bouncy. So if you
think about if you have
something on your page that
can be clicked or can
be manipulated make it move
a little bit just subtly
so that someone understands it.
Okay. This is this is
something more than just a
static element on the page.
That is a really great
Point anytime that anything. Thing,
you know just a little
shimmy is enough for you
to go and say oh
that's a thing because you
know, we I was I
was remember reading somewhere that
our brains are always looking
in the peripheral vision for
threats. So things on the
screen that wiggle cause the
some part of your brain
to go what and there
is no squirrel and then
you want to go and
mess with that and I
read an article recently saying
that we also want constant
feedback that things are going
well, so it recommended that
we put a ripple effect
on all of our buttons
because So many people click
a button with their iPads
or their touch screens and
they don't know if anything
happened and then they end
up hitting the button twice
as simple ripple effect tells
them that it did. In
fact get clicked. Oh, yeah.
I mean, there's all sorts
of little design cues that
can be incorporated to make
sure that we're sending the
right message to users that
there's something available to be
done. There's there's something happening
in the background that you're
not just sitting and waiting
for no reason and you
have to click the button
again, so I Love those
those examples of kind of
using psychology in a way
in an applied way to
make sure that people are
getting the most out of
your interfaces. Let me put
you on the spot as
we get ready to close
here. What is your favorite
visualization? What's an example that
of wanting to the you
did or the one that
you saw where you just
had to be like, oh
my goodness and you just
rush pick your laptop off
and up and run down
the hallway and say look
at this. Look how they
did that. That was amazing.
There are many I think
that a lot of the
work coming out of the
National Geographic recently has been
really really impressive to me.
They've been doing some really
cool things with with 3D
visuals, which we rarely see
done and if we do
see them they're rarely actually
done. Well, I'm so they've
done some things with showing
planets in the solar system
and even 3D models of
dinosaur bones and you can
kind of play as a
as a archaeologist looking at
looking at these fossils. I
think Beyond those ER one
that I really loved recently
was this tree ring graphic
of immigrations, which was I'll
I'll send you the link
because I'm blanking on who
it was but it was
it was just it was
just a beautiful combination of
Aesthetics and information. It was
kind of a masterclass effect.
Was that the National Geographic
200 years of u.s. Immigration
looks like the Rings at
yeah. That's the one. Yeah,
these kind of things are
really really significant because they're
taking Something organic and then
aligning it with something organic
that we intuitively know at,
you know, we know as
we learn a small children
how the rings of a
tree Express Generations. So what
a clever way to take
what could be a boring
radial graph and make it
feel organic. Exactly. Yeah kind
of piggybacking on people's existing
understandings of how trees work
and using it as a
metaphor. I think was really
brilliant there. Yeah, that's fantastic.
I will be sure to
include links to that and
people can go and explore
Nat Geo. So.com, which is
full of great stuff like
this all throughout some of
the best work in visualization
as well as the work
that happened as you mentioned
on 538 that you were
associated with as well. Thank
you. Yeah. Well, thank you
so much. I really appreciate
you chatting me with me
today Matthew conlon. It's been
great. Thanks so much for
having me. This has been
another episode of Hansel minutes
and we'll see you again
next week.